# Perl Weekly Challenge 137: Lychrel Number

## [Challenge][task2]
>>>>
You are given a number, `10 <= $n <= 1000`.

Write a script to find out if the given number is Lychrel number.
To keep the task simple, we impose the following rules:

* Stop if the number of iterations reached `500`.
* Stop if you end up with number `>= 10_000_000`.

If you stop because of any of the above two rules then we
expect `1` as an output.

According to [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lychrel_number):

>>>>
A Lychrel number is a natural number that cannot form a palindrome
through the iterative process of repeatedly reversing its digits
and adding the resulting numbers.
<<<<

<<<<

### Example 1

>>>>
~~~~
Input: $n = 56
Output: 0
~~~~

After 1 iteration, we found a palindrome number.<br>
`56 + 65 = 121`.
<<<<

### Example 2

>>>>
~~~~
Input: $n = 57
Output: 0
~~~~

After 2 iterations, we found a palindrome number.<br>
`57 +  75 = 132`<br>
`132 + 231 = 363`
<<<<


### Example 3

>>>>
~~~~
Input: $n = 59
Output: 0
~~~~

After 3 iterations, we found a palindrome number.<br>
`59 +  95 =  154`<br>
`154 + 451 =  605`<br>
`605 + 506 = 1111`
<<<<


[task2]: https://theweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-137/#TASK2


## Discussion

This is a bit of a peculiar task. We are asked to find Lychrel numbers,
yet there are (in base 10), no known Lychrel numbers. For most of the numbers
below 1,000, it is known they are not Lychrel. The numbers which are not
known to be Lychrel form sequence [A023108](#oeis) in the
[OEIS](https://oeis.org). There are 13 numbers below 1,000 which are
not known to be Lychrel; of which two are so-called "seeds": 196,
and 986. All the other unknowns quickly convergence to the same sequence
as is generated when starting from 196.

This makes that the extra condition (at most 500 iterations, or reaching
10,000,000 or higher) is of interest. But there are some oddities. First,
it causes some numbers known to not be a Lychrel, to be reported to be one.
Take for instance the number 89. If we reverse it and add it to itself,
and do this process 24 times, we reach 8,813,200,023,188, which is a
palindrome. Which makes 89 *not* a Lychrel number. However, 
8,813,200,023,188 exceeds 10,000,000, so the wanted program will report
this as a Lychrel number. In fact, there are 42 numbers below 1,000
whose sequence gets terminated because it reaches 10,000,000. Of those
42, 29 are known not to be Lychrel numbers. It's not until we increase
the cut-off to 8,813,200,023,189 that we only report 13 numbers to be
Lychrel numbers: exactly the 13 numbers below 1,000 of which it is not
known whether they are Lychrel numbers or not.

Second, the limit of 500 iterations is pointless. The numbers grow rapidly,
and for each of the numbers up to 1000, we reach a number which is either
a palindrome or which is at least 10,000,000 in at most 12 steps. Even
if we raise the cut-off value to 8,813,200,023,189, it never takes more
than 27 iterations to either reach a palindrome, or to exceed the cut-off
value.

Here is a plot of how many iterations we need for the numbers from 10
to 1000 to find the answer. Points in green mean the number converges
to a palindrome less than 10,000,000. Each of them is reached in nine
iterations or less. Points in red reach a number exceeding 10,000,000.

<div>
<canvas id = "iterations">
</div>

So, we might as well forget about the 500 iterations limit; which is 
exactly what we do in our solutions.

## Live Demo

Enter a number below, hit the calculate button, and we tell you
whether the sequence reaches a palindrome, or whether it hits
one of the (configurable) limits: max iterations, or the cut-off value.

|====
Starting number: & <input type = 'number' id = 'num'> \\
Max iterations: & <input type = 'number' value = '500' id = 'max_iter'> \\
Cut-off: & <input type = 'number' value = '10000000' id = 'cut_off'> \\
{cs=2}<button style = "width: 100%;" onclick = "lychrel ()">Calculate</button>
====|

<span id = 'result'></span>


## Solutions

### Perl

In Perl, it's very easy to reverse a number. [`reverse`](#) reverses
a string, but in Perl conversions between numbers and strings happen
automatically.

A function to check whether a number is a Lychrel number (according
to the definition in the challenge, not the definition the rest of
the world uses) is easy. As stated above, we don't check for the 
number of iterations. Which leaves us with two checks:

* If the number exceeds 10,000,000, we return true.
* If the number equals its reverse, we return false.
* Else, we recurse.

This gives us:

~~~~
sub is_lychrel ($n) {
    $n >= 10_000_000   ? 1
  : $n eq reverse ($n) ? 0
  : is_lychrel ($n + reverse $n)}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Pascal

Most other languages either don't have a build in reverse method, or
don't automatically convert between strings and numbers. In those cases,
we need to write our own `reverse` method. This is a pretty simple
process, and we use the same algorithm in each language. For instance,
in Pascal, we use:

~~~~
function reverse (num: Longint): Longint;
    var
        rev: Longint;

    begin
        rev := 0;
        while num > 0 do begin
            rev := rev * 10;
            rev := rev + (num mod 10);
            num := num div 10;
        end;
        reverse := rev;
    end;
~~~~

It boils down to repeatedly chopping off the last digit of `num`
(which is our input value), and adding it to `rev` (the return
value). But by first multiplying `rev` by `10` before adding a new
digit, we end up with the wanted result.

The check function then looks like:

~~~~
function ly (num: Longint): integer;
    begin
        if num >= 10000000 then
            ly := 1
        else if num = reverse (num) then
            ly := 0
        else 
            ly := ly (num + reverse (num))
    end;
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Other Languages

We also have solutions in
[AWK](#github),
[Bash](#github),
[bc](#github),
[C](#github),
[Go](#github),
[Java](#github),
[Lua](#github),
[Node.js](#github),
[Python](#github),
[R](#github),
[Ruby](#github),
[Scheme](#github), and
[Tcl](#github).
