# Perl Weekly Challenge 107: Self-descriptive Numbers

## [Challenge](https://perlweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-107/#TASK1)

> Write a script to display the first three self-descriptive numbers.
> As per [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-descriptive_number),
> the definition of Self-descriptive Number is
> 
> > In mathematics, a self-descriptive number is an integer `m` that in
> > a given base `b` is `b` digits long in which each digit `d` at position
> > `n` (the most significant digit being at position `0` and the least
> > significant at position `b - 1`) counts how many instances of
> > digit `n` are in `m`.

### Example
`1210` is a four-digit self-descriptive number:

* position `0` has value `1` i.e. there is only one `0` in the number
* position `1` has value `2` i.e. there are two `1` in the number
* position `2` has value `1` i.e. there is only one `2` in the number
* position `3` has value `0` i.e. there is no `3` in the number

### Output
~~~~
1210, 2020, 21200
~~~~

## Discussion

In essence, this is just a [`Hello, World!`](#wiki:%22Hello,_World!%22_program)
program. We don't even need to go to the [OEIS](#oeis:A138480) to find
the first three numbers -- the challenge tells us what the output is!

To still have a tiny bit of a challenge, we will derive what the
first three self-describing numbers are.

Let \(N_b\) be a self-describing number in base \(b\). \(N_b\) has \(b\)
digits: \(N = d_{0} d_{1} \ldots d_{b-1}\). We then have the following
observations:

1. \(0 < d_0\): we do not accept a leading \(0\).
2. \(b = \sum_{i=0}^{b-1} d_i\). This follows from the definition
   of a self-describing number: the sum of the digits must equal
   the number of digits, and the number of digits is \(b\).
3. \(\forall i: 0 \leq i \leq b - 1 \implies d_i < b - 1\).
   (A self-describing number in base \(b\) does not contain the
    digit \(b - 1\)). Suppose \(N_b\) does contain such a digit. 
   Then by point ii, \(N_b\) contains a \(1\), and all other digits
   are \(0\). If \(b = 2\) that would imply that \(N_2 = 11\), but
   \(11\) clearly is not self describing. Otherwise \(d_0 > 0\)
   (by point i); \(d_1 > 0\) (since \(N_b\) contains at least one
   \(1\)), and all other digits are \(0\). But that means that
   \(d_{b-1}\) is \(0\), which contradicts that \(N_b\) contains
   the digit \(b - 1\).
4. \(b > 2 \implies d_{b-1} = 0\) (The last digit is a \(0\)). This
    follows directly from point iii.
5. \(b > 4 \implies d_0 > 1\) (For bases larger than \(4\), a self-describing
   number contains at least two \(0\)s). Suppose \(b > 4\), and \(d_0 = 1\).
   This means that \(N_b\) contains just a single \(0\), and this has to
   be \(d_{b-1}\) (by point iv). The digits \(d_1 \ldots d_{b-2}\)
   have to sum to \(b - 1\) (by point ii) which means that one of
   those digits is a \(2\), and the rest are \(1\)s. But then
   \(N_b\) contains \(b - 2\) \(1\)s, one \(2\) and one \(0\). And
   since \(b > 4\), \(b - 2 > 2\), so \(N_b\) cannot be self-describing.
6. \(b > 4 \implies d_0 < b - 2\). (For bases larger than \(4\), a
   self-describing number has at least three digits which are not \(0\)).
   the first digit must be less than \(b - 2\)). Suppose we would have a
   self-describing number \(N_b\), with \(d_0 = b - 2\). That means
   that only one of the digits \(d_1, d_2, \cdots, d_{b-1}\) is non-zero.
   Let \(d_k\) be this non-zero digit. By point ii, \(d_k = 2\), and 
   by point i, \(k > 0\). But that implies that \(N_b\) contains
   the digit \(k\) twice. However, \(N_b\) contains the digit \(b - 2\)
   once (we did assume \(d_0 = b - 2\)), the digit \(2\) once, and 
   the digit \(0\), \(b - 2\) times. \(b > 4 \implies b - 2 > 2\), so
   the number cannot be self-describing.
7. \(b > 5 \implies d_0 > 2\) (For bases larger than \(5\), a self-describing
   number contains more than two \(0\)s).
   By point v, we already know \(d_0 > 1\).
   Suppose we have a self-describing number \(N_b, b > 5\), with
   \(d_0 = 2\). That means, \(N_b\) has \(b - 2\) digits which are
   non-zero, and sum to \(b\). This implies \(N_b\) has two \(2\)s,
   \(b - 4\) 1s, and two \(0\)s. Two \(2\)s means \(d_0 = d_2 = 2\),
   which means \(d_1 = 0 \vee d_1 = 1\). But we also have \(d_1 = b - 2 > 3\),
   which leads to a contradiction.
8. \(b > 5 \implies d_0 < b - 3\) (For bases larger than \(5\), a
   self-describing number has at least four digits which are not \(0\)).
   By point vi, we already know
   \(d_0 < b - 2\). Suppose we have a self-describing number \(N_b, b > 5\),
   with \(d_0 = b - 3\). That means that outside of \(d_0\), \(N_b\)
   has two digits which are not \(0\). And since those two numbers
   must sum to \(3\) (by point ii), the only possibility for those
   numbers is that one of them is \(1\), and the other is \(2\). But
   that means we have three different digits which appear once:
   \(1\), \(2\) and \(b - 3\). And that would mean \(d_1 = 3\), which
   leads to a contraction.

We're now ready to derive the first three self-describing numbers.

1. There cannot be any self-describing numbers for base \(b = 1\). 
   The only digits in that base are \(0\), but we cannot have a
   leading \(0\).
2. For base \(2\), point i implies any \(N_2\)
   must start with a \(1\). But this constradicts point iii, so we 
   cannot have a self-describing number in base \(2\).
3. For base \(3\), points i and iii imply that for any \(N_3\)
   \(d_0 = 1\) (the first digit). Point iv implies the number end
   with a \(0\), so \(d_2 = 0\). Then, by point ii, \(d_1 = 2\),
   but this contradicts point iii.
   So there cannot be any self-describing numbers in base \(3\).
4. For base \(4\), points ii and iii imply any \(N_4\) has
   \(d_0 = 1\) or \(d_0 = 2\). Point iv implies that \(d_3 = 0\).
    * If \(d_0 = 1\), then \(d_1 + d_2 = 3\), so one of them is
      \(1\), and the other \(2\). \(d_1\) cannot be \(1\),
      because it describes the number of \(1\)s in the number,
      and we have 2 of them. So, \(d_1 = 2\) and \(d_2 = 1\).
      This does not lead to any contractions, so the first
      self-describing number is \(1210\).
    * If \(d_0 = 2\), then \(d_1 + d_2 = 2\). If \(d_1 = d_2 = 1\),
      then we have two \(1\)s, but \(d_1 = 1\), so that would
      not be self-describing. Which leaves the possibility one of
      \(d_1\) and \(d_2\) is \(0\), and the other \(2\).
      \(d_1 = 2\) is not going to work, as that would imply
      \(N_4\) has two \(1\)s -- but there are none. If \(d_1 = 0\),
      we get \(d_2 = 2\), which does not lead to a contraction,
      so the second self-describing number is \(2020\).
5. For base \(5\), by points iii, v, and vi, we have one possiblity for
   the first digit: \(d_0 = 2\). That means any \(N_5\) contains
   contains two \(0\)s, including \(d_4\). Hence, \(d_1 + d_2 + d_3 = 3\),
   with one of those digits being \(0\). The other two must therefore be
   \(1\), and \(2\). This means \(N_5\) contains two \(2\)s, so
   \(d_2 = 2\). There are no \(3\)s, so \(d_3 = 0\), and \(d_1 = 1\).
   This makes \(21200\) the third self-describing number.
6. There are no self-describing numbers in base \(6\). From point vii
   it can be deduced that for any number \(N_6\), \(d_0 > 2\). From
   point viii it can be deduced that \(d_0 < 3\). But no such digit exists.
7. For any base \(b > 6\), there is at least one self-describing number.
   In particular, a number where \(d_0 = b - 4, d_1 = 2, d_2 = 1\),
   and \(d_{b-3} = 1\) and all other digits \(d_i\) are \(0\) is
   self-describing. For bases \(7, 8, 9\) and \(10\), this gives
   the self-describing numbers \(3211000, 42101000, 521001000\), and
   \(6210001000\).


## Solution

### Perl

As said above, we just have a glorified `Hello, World!` program,
so all we need to do is use [`say`](#) and the text we want to
display.
~~~~
say "1210, 2020, 21200";
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Other languages

We also have boring solutions in [AWK](#github), [Basic](#github),
[Bc](#github), [Befunge-93](#github), [C](#github), [Cobol](#github),
[Csh](#github), [Erlang](#github), [Forth](#github), [Fortran](#github),
[Go](#github), [Java](#github), [Lua](#github), [m4](#github),
[Node.js](#github), [OCaml](#github), [Pascal](#github), [PHP](#github),
[PostScript](#github), [Python](#github), [R](#github), [Rexx](#github),
[Ruby](#github), [Scheme](#github), [sed](#github), [SQL](#github),
and [Tcl](#github).
