# Perl Weekly Challenge 131: Consecutive Arrays

## [Challenge][task1]
>>>>
You are given a sorted list of unique positive integers.

Write a script to return list of arrays where the arrays are consecutive integers.
<<<<

### Example 1

~~~~
Input:  (1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9)
Output: ([1, 2, 3], [6, 7, 8, 9])
~~~~

### Example 2

~~~~
Input:  (11, 12, 14, 17, 18, 19)
Output: ([11, 12], [14], [17, 18, 19])
~~~~

### Example 3

~~~~
Input:  (2, 4, 6, 8)
Output: ([2], [4], [6], [8])
~~~~

### Example 4

~~~~
Input:  (1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
Output: ([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])
~~~~

## Solution

We will be reading the array from standard input, with all the numbers
on the same line. We will be writing each array to a different line
of standard output.

We will be iterating over the numbers, keeping the previous processed
number in a variable `prev`, which we initialize to `0`. For each number
we first print a separator, then the number. The separator printed
depends on the previous and current number:

* If `prev` is `0`, we use the empty string as separator (this only happens
  for the first number).
* If `prev` is one less than the current number, we use a space as
  separator (as it belongs to the same array as the previous number
  belongs to)
* Else, we use a new line as separator (since we start a new array).

### Perl

With the input array in `$_`, and having `$prev` initialized to `0`,
the gist of the program is just a one liner:

~~~~
print $prev ? $prev + 1 == $_ ? " " : "\n" : "", $prev = $_ for /[0-9]+/g
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### AWK

The AWK solution is quite similar. AWK auto splits the input on white
space, making each field available in variables `$1`, `$2`, etc.

~~~~
{
    prev = 0
    for (i = 1; i <= NF; i ++) {
        printf ("%s%d", prev == 0 ? "" : (prev + 1 == $i) ? " " : "\n",
                       (prev = $i))
    }
    printf ("\n")
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### C

In C, we use [`sscanf`](#) to extract the numbers from a given string,
then follow the same steps we used in our Perl and AWK solutions.
Here, we have the line of input in variable `line_ptr`:

~~~~
int num;
int offset;
int prev = 0;
while (sscanf (line_ptr, "%d%n", &num, &offset) == 1) {
    printf ("%s%d", prev     == 0   ? ""
                  : prev + 1 == num ? " "
                  :                   "\n", num);
    prev = num;
    line_ptr += offset;
}
printf ("\n");
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

[task1]: https://theweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-131/#TASK1

