# Perl Weekly Challenge 145: Palindromic Tree

## [Challenge][task2]
>>>>
You are given a string `$s`.

Write a script to create a `Palindromic Tree` for the given string.

I found this <a href="https://medium.com/@alessiopiergiacomi/eertree-or-palindromic-tree-82453e75025b"><strong>blog</strong></a> exaplaining `Palindromic Tree` in detail.
<<<<

### Example 1

~~~~
Input: $s = 'redivider'
Output: r redivider e edivide d divid i ivi v
~~~~

### Example 2

~~~~
Input: $s = 'deific'
Output: d e i ifi f c
~~~~

### Example 3

~~~~
Input: $s = 'rotors'
Output: r rotor o oto t s
~~~~

### Example 4

~~~~
Input: $s = 'challenge'
Output: c h a l ll e n g
~~~~

### Example 5

~~~~
Input: $s = 'champion'
Output: c h a m p i o n
~~~~

### Example 6

~~~~
Input: $s = 'christmas'
Output: c h r i s t m a
~~~~

[task2]: https://theweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-145/#TASK2


## Discussion

This is one of the many challenges which makes we want to turn away
from the Perl Weekly Challenge, and never look back.

The challenge description asks us to do a specific thing (create a 
*Palindromic Tree*, which is a graph based data structure), then the
examples completely ignore that, and just lists all the palindromic
substrings of the input, with duplicates removed.

So, is it:

* *Do as I say*, or
* *Do as I do*?

We will opt for the latter. And since there is, obviously, no requirement
on the order of the outputted substrings, we will assume the order given
in the examples (same order as their first appearance in the input) is
an artifact of the algorithm used, and not a requirement. 

### Unicode and Combining Characters

With Unicode, graphemes are not the same as characters. A grapheme
can consist of more than one character, or can be expressed in 
multiple ways.

Take for instance '&ograve;'. This could be a single character,
[`Latin Small Letter O with Grave`](https://www.compart.com/en/unicode/U+00F2).
Or it could be two:
[`Latin Small Letter O`](https://www.compart.com/en/unicode/U+006F) followed by
[`Combining Grave Accent`](https://www.compart.com/en/unicode/U+0300).
If the former is a palindrome, should the latter be? What if we have
'&ograve;&ograve;' where one of the graphemes consists of an 'o' and
a combining accent?

We decide to ignore all of this, and only look at the character level.
So, '&ograve;' is a palindrome if and only if it's a single character.


## Solutions

We will assume the input consists of one or more lines; for each line (sans
its newline), we calculate the palindromic substrings.

### Perl

The "usual way" to get all the substrings of string to have have
two nested for loops, iterating over the indices. However, we
can abuse Perls regexp engine:

~~~~
/(.+)(?{code})(*FAIL)/
~~~~

Here, `(.+)` matches any substring, putting the matched substring in
`$1`. Perl will prefer the left-most, longest
substring, but only under the condition the rest of the pattern matches.
`(?{code})` is a construct which always matches -- its point is to execute
`code`. It will be executed each time `(.+)` matches, and `code` will have
access to `$1`. `(*FAIL)` however, is a construct which will always fail
to match, causing the engine to backtrack.

The result is that Perl will try to match each and every substring with
`(.+)` before finally concluding there is no match. We don't care about
the actual not matching; we do care about the side effect: `code` is
executed exactly once for every substring.

So, what will be put into `code`? A check if the substring is a palindrome,
and if so, we collect it:

~~~~
my %seen;
/(.+)(?{$seen {$1} ++ if $1 eq reverse $1})(*FAIL)/;
~~~~

A palindrome reads the same back to front as front to back, so comparing
it to its [`reverse`](#) will do.

Now `%seen` will have all the palindromic substrings as its keys, which
we can easily print:

~~~~
local $, = $";
say keys %seen;
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM


### Tcl

Our Tcl solution will use two nested loops to extract all substrings.
If the substring is a palindrome, we put it in a dictionary. At the
end, we print the keys of the dictionary:

~~~~
while {[gets stdin line] >= 0} {
    set palindromes [dict create]
    for {set i 0} {$i < [string length $line]} {incr i} {
        for {set j $i} {$j < [string length $line]} {incr j} {
            set str [string range $line $i $j]
            if {$str == [string reverse $str]} {
                dict set palindromes $str 1
            }
        }
    }
    puts [dict keys $palindromes]
}
~~~~

`string range` gives the substring.

FULL_PROGRAM

### Go

Go doesn't have a method to reverse a string, so, we first create a 
method to check whether a string is a palindrome:

~~~~
func is_palindrome (str string) bool {
    runes := [] rune (str)
    for i, j := 0, len (runes) - 1; i < j; i, j = i + 1, j - 1 {
        if runes [i] != runes [j] {
            return false
        }
    }
    return true
}
~~~~

In Go, strings can be split into sequences of
[*runes*](https://go.dev/blog/strings), where a rune
is more or less equivalent to a Unicode code point. Once split
into runes we'll use two pointers, one from the start and counting
upwards, and one from the end counting downwards. We'll compare
the runes under the pointers, and return false if there is any
pair which differs. If all pairs agree, it's a palindrome.

We can now use two nested loops to get substrings of the input line
(`text`), and if the substring is a palindrome, we store it in a
[`map`](https://go.dev/blog/maps). At the end, we print the keys
from the map:

~~~~
palindromes := make (map [string] bool)
for i := 0; i < len (text) - 1; i ++ {
    for j := i; j < len (text) - 1; j ++ {
        substr := text [i : j + 1]
        if is_palindrome (substr) {
            palindromes [substr] = true
        }
    }
}
for k := range palindromes {
    fmt . Printf ("%s ", k)
}
fmt . Println ("")
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Other languages

We also have implementations in:

[AWK](#github),
[Bash](#github),
[C](#github),
[Java](#github),
[Lua](#github),
[Node.js](#github),
[Pascal](#github),
[Python](#github),
[R](#github),
[Ruby](#github), and
[Scheme](#github).
