# Perl Weekly Challenge 368: Make It Bigger

## [Challenge][task1]
>>>>
You are given a given a string number and a character digit.

Write a script to remove exactly one occurrence of the given character digit from the given string number, resulting the decimal form is maximised.
<<<<

### Examples:

~~~~
    Input: $str = "15456", $char = "5"
    Output: "1546"

    Input: $str = "7332", $char = "3"
    Output: "732"

    Input: $str = "2231", $char = "2"
    Output: "231"

    Input: $str = "543251", $char = "5"
    Output: "54321"

    Input: $str = "1921", $char = "1"
    Output: "921"
~~~~

[task1]: https://theweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-368/#TASK1

## Solution

It is not hard to see that we need to remove the left most occurrence of
the given character digit which is followed by a larger digit, or, if there
is not such an occurrence, we need to remove the right most occurrence of
the given character digit.

We will use three different methods to do this, depending on the language:

1. Using a regular expression based substitution: ([Lua](#github),
   [Node.js](#github), [Perl](#perl), [Python](#python), [R](#github),
   [Ruby](#ruby), [sed](#gnu_sed), and [Tcl](#github)).
2. Split the string into an array of single character strings; process
   the array; then print the result: ([AWK](#gnu_awk), [bc](#github), and
   [Go](#github)).
3. Find the index of the character we want to remove, then print the
   string, except the character on the marked index: ([Bash](#bash), and
   [C](#github)).

Our programs will read their input from standard input. Each line consists
of an input string, and the character digit, separated by a space. We make
the assumption the input does not contain a `0`.

### Perl

If we want to match a given digit, say `$digit`, followed by a digit which
is larger, one way of doing that is to calculate `$ndigit = $digit + 1`, then
use the pattern `/$digit[$ndigit-9]/`. And we have to make an exception for
`$digit == 9`, as `/9[10-9]/` is not going to match what we want.

But Perl allows use to something more clever. Consider the character
classes `[$ndigit-9]` and `[$digit-9]` (remember, `$ndigit == $digit + 1`).
The former matches all digits from `$ndigit` to `9`. The
latter matches all digits from `$digit` to `9`, so exactly one digit
more -- this digit being `$digit`. Using a modern version of Perl,
we can make use of that, so we can avoid calculating `$ndigit`.
Consider

~~~~
    s/$digit(?=(?[[$digit-9] - [$digit]]))//
~~~~

The constuct `(?[ ])` allows use to do arithmetic with character
classes.  Here, we start with the character class `[$digit-9]`,
then subtract the character class `[$digit]`. Hence,
`(?[[$digit-9] - [$digit]])` matches any digits from `$digit` to `9`,
excluding `$digit`. So, it matches the same as `[$ndigit-9]`, without having
to calculate `$ndigit`. As an added bonus, it will do _'the right thing'_
if `$digit == 9`, that is, it will never match.

So, the pattern above will match a digit `$digit`, which is followed by 
a larger digit (the following digit will not be part of the match, due
to the use of `(?= )`, which is a the zero-width lookahead construct).
Thus, if we substitute this by the empty string, we have removed the
digit `$digit`, and nothing else.

This takes care of removing the left most occurrence of the character digit
which is followed by a larger digit.

Removing the last occurrence of the digit, which we need to do with there
is no occurrence of the character digit followed by a larger one, can be
done as follows:

~~~~
    s/.*\K$digit//
~~~~

The `.*` part causes the entire pattern the match the last occurrence 
of the character digit `$digit`. The `\K` construct keeps the match to the
left of it -- thus only the digit `$digit` gets removed, and the part before
it kept.

This leads to the following code:

~~~~
    my ($input, $digit) = split;
    $input =~ s/$digit(?=(?[[$digit-9] - [$digit]]))// ||
    $input =~ s/.*\K$digit//;
    say $input;
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Python

Python regular expressions do have zero-width lookahead, but not the
character class arithmetic Perl has. So we need to do a bit more
work.

We first try the first possibility, removing the left most character
digit which is followed by a larger digit:

~~~~
    [input, digit] = line . rstrip () . split ()

    n = 0   
    if digit != "9":
        ndigit = str (int (digit) + 1)
        pat = digit + "(?=[" + ndigit + "-9])"
        [ninput, n] = re . subn (pat, "", input, count = 1)
~~~~

Unlike its Perl equivalence, Python's `subn` method always returns two
values: the string, `ninput`, after substitution (or the same string if
there was no match), and the number of substitutions made (`n`).

We can use the value of `n` to determine whether we need to remove the
last occurrence of the character digit:

~~~~
    if n == 0:
        ninput = re . sub ("(.*)" + digit, "\\1", input, count = 1)
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Ruby

Ruby's `sub!` method doesn't return whether the substitution succeeded --
it just the modifies the string. But it can take a block as argument,
using the result of the block as substition; and we can use this block
to signal success:

~~~~
    n = 0
    if digit != "9"
        pat = Regexp . new digit + "(?=[" + (digit . to_i + 1) . to_s + "-9])"
        input.sub!(pat) {n = 1; ""}
    end

    if n == 0
        pat = Regexp . new "(.*)" + digit
        input.sub! pat, "\\1"
    end
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

We have implementations in different languages which use similar approaches
as to ones above: [Lua](#github), [Node.js](#github), [R](#github), and
[Tcl](#github).


### (GNU) sed

Our implementation in sed uses regular expressions, but in a different
way than the implementations above. sed doesn't have variables, just
the current line of input. Hence, we can't paste a pattern together.

We need a different approach. We're going to make use of the fact the
digit part of the input has only limited set of options: 1 .. 9. 

We will start by stripping off the digit from the input, and jumping to
a different label for each different possible digit:

~~~~
    s/ 1$//; tl1
    s/ 2$//; tl2
    s/ 3$//; tl3
    s/ 4$//; tl4   
    s/ 5$//; tl5
    s/ 6$//; tl6
    s/ 7$//; tl7
    s/ 8$//; tl8
    s/ 9$//; tl9
~~~~

The key here is the `t` command. If the previous command succeeds,
the `t` jumbs to the label following `t`. So, if the digit is `1`,
we just to label `l1`. If the digit is `2`, we jump to label `l2`, etc.
At this moment, we have stripped off the digit and the space before it,
meaning we just have the input left.

In the second part, we try the remove the digit:

~~~~
    :l1; s/1([2-9])/\1/; t; s/(.*)1/\1/; b  # Handle digit == 1
    :l2; s/2([3-9])/\1/; t; s/(.*)2/\1/; b  # Handle digit == 2
    :l3; s/3([4-9])/\1/; t; s/(.*)3/\1/; b  # Handle digit == 3
    :l4; s/4([5-9])/\1/; t; s/(.*)4/\1/; b  # Handle digit == 4       
    :l5; s/5([6-9])/\1/; t; s/(.*)5/\1/; b  # Handle digit == 5
    :l6; s/6([7-9])/\1/; t; s/(.*)6/\1/; b  # Handle digit == 6
    :l7; s/7([8-9])/\1/; t; s/(.*)7/\1/; b  # Handle digit == 7
    :l8; s/8([9-9])/\1/; t; s/(.*)8/\1/; b  # Handle digit == 8
    :l9;                    s/(.*)9/\1/; b  # Handle digit == 9
~~~~

Consider if, for instance, the digit is `4`. We then jump to label `l4`.
We first try the command `s/4([5-9])/\1/`, which tries to remove the leftmost
`4` which is followed by a larger digit. If this succeeds, the `t` command
performs a jump. Since no label follows the `t`, it jumps to the end of
the program, causing sed to print the current (modified) line, and restart
the program with the next line of input. 

If the substitution fails, that is, there is no `4` followed by a larger
digit, we execute `s/(.*)4/\1/`, which removes the last `4` in the current
line of input. The following `b` is an unconditional jump -- and since
it doesn't have a label, it jumps to the end of the program, printing out
the current line.

Note that if the digit equals `9`, we only try to remove the last
`9` in the input, as there is no digit which is larger than `9`.

FULL_PROGRAM


### (GNU) AWK

In our AWK solution, we're not using regular expressions. Instead, we
split the input into an array:

~~~~
    input = $1
    digit = $2

    n = split (input, chars, "")
~~~~

`chars` is now an array with one character strings. `n` is the number
of characters. Note than in AWK, array indexing starts at `0`.

A first pass through the array reveals whether the character digit
is followed by a larger digit. If so, we'll replace the entry with
an empty string, and set `matched` to a true value.

~~~~
    matched = 0
    for (i = 1; i < n; i ++) {
        if (chars [i] == digit && chars [i + 1] > digit) {
            chars [i] = ""
            matched   = 1
            break
        }
    }
~~~~

If we did not find a match, we will remove the last occurrence of the
character digit:

~~~~
    if (matched == 0) {
        for (i = n; i >= 1; i --) {
            if (chars [i] == digit) {
                chars [i] = ""
                break
            }
        }
    }
~~~~

We can now print the results:

~~~~
    for (i in chars) {
        printf "%s", chars [i]
    }    
    printf "\n"
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

Our [bc](#github) and [Go](#github) solutions use a similar approach.

### Bash

In our Bash solution we won't delete the offending digit from the string;
instead, we find the index of the character we'd like to remove, then
print the string, omitting the character we want to omit.

First, we try to find the leftmost character digit followed by a larger
character:

~~~~
    ((index = -1))
    for ((i = 0; i < ${#input} - 1; i ++))
    do  ((ch  = ${input:$i:1}))             # Character on index i
        ((nch = ${input:$((i + 1)):1}))     # Character on index i + 1
        if   [[ $ch -eq $digit && $nch -gt $digit ]]
        then ((index = i))
             break
        fi
    done
~~~~

Bash syntax is a bit unusual. `${#input}` is the length of the string
in the variable `input`. `${input:$i:1}` gets a substring from `input`,
starting at position `$i` and one character long. The Perl equivalence
is `substr ($input, $i, 1)`. `-eq` is a numerical equals tests, while
`-gt` is a numerical greater than test. If we find a match, `index` will
be a non-negative number.

If there is no match, we find the index of the last occurrence of the
character digit:

~~~~
     if   [[ $index -eq -1 ]]
     then for ((i = ${#input} - 1; i >= 0; i --))
          do  if   [[ ${input:$i:1} -eq $digit ]]
              then ((index = i))
                   break
              fi
          done      
     fi
~~~~

We can now print the result

~~~~
    echo ${input:0:$index}${input:$((index + 1))}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

Our [C](#github) solution uses a similar approach.
