# Perl Weekly Challenge 134: Pandigital Numbers

## [Challenge][task1]
>>>>
Write a script to generate first 5 *Pandigital Numbers* in base 10.

As per the [**wikipedia**](#wiki:Pandigital_number), it says:

>>>>
A pandigital number is an integer that in a given base has among
its significant digits each digit used in the base at least once.
<<<<
<<<<

[task1]: https://theweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-134/#TASK1

## Discussion

It's clear that the first pandigital numbers are ten digits long,
and contain each of the digits exactly once. There are
\(9 \cdot 9! = 3265920\)
pandigital numbers with exactly ten digits. Those are all the 
permutations of the digits 0 to 9, excluding the permutations starting
with a 0.

Since the pandigital numbers are in order, all the first six
pandigital numbers start with 1023456, followed by a permutation
of the digits 7, 8, and 9. Since we only need to generate the
first five pandigital numbers, the permutations we need are
789, 798, 879, 897, and 978 (and in that order).

## Solution

Our solutions will have an array with the five permutations of 7, 8,
and 9 we are interested in. This array will be hardcoded -- this
set is too small and simple to be bothered with an algorithm to
generate them.

We will loop over the array, and either print `"1023456"` and a 
permutation as a string, or the sum of `1023456000` and a permutation
as a number.

### AWK

AWK doesn't have array literals, so we start with populating an array
with permutations using [`split`](#String-Functions):

~~~~
n = split ("789 798 879 897 978", tails, " ")
~~~~

This splits the string `"789 798 879 897 978"` on spaces, with the
results placed in the array `tails`. The return value of `split`
is the number of resulting fields -- which is the size of the array
`tails`.

We can now print the numbers:

~~~~
for (i = 1; i <= n; i ++) {
    print "1023456" tails [i]
}
~~~~

In AWK, concatenation is done by just putting values next to each other.

FULL_PROGRAM

### Bash

~~~~
for n in 789 798 879 897 978
do echo 1023456$n
done
~~~~

In Bash, we don't even have to bother we an array. We can directly
loop over a list. Concatenation is done by just sticking `$n` to
`1023456`.

FULL_PROGRAM

### Basic

We make use of a very barebones implementation of BASIC:
[`Language::Basic`](#). This means, no array literals. So, when we
start off with creating an array, we have to assign each value
separately:

~~~~
100 DIM T(5)
110 T (1) = 789
120 T (2) = 798
130 T (3) = 879
140 T (4) = 897
150 T (5) = 978
~~~~

Line `100` declares an array `T`, of size five. The next five lines
set the permutations.

We now loop over the array, printing the sum of `1023456000` and the
permutation:

~~~~
200 FOR i = 1 TO 5
210     PRINT 1023456000 + T (i)
220 NEXT i
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### bc

No array literals in bc either, so again, we have to set each
value separately. We don't have to declare the variable though:

~~~~
t[1] = 789; t[2] = 798; t[3] = 879; t[4] = 897; t[5] = 978
~~~~

We can now print the sum of `1023456000` and each of the
permutations:

~~~~
for (i = 1; i <= 5; i ++) {
    1023456000 + t[i]
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Befunge-93

There are no variables in Befunge-93; just the stack, and the 80x24 cells
which make up the program. Befunge-93 doesn't have strings either, just
unsigned integers. 

We start up by putting the wanted permutations on the stack -- or rather,
the ASCII values of the fifteen characters which make up the five
permutations:

~~~~
"879798978897987"v
~~~~

Note that we put the last characters first on the stack; this means
that after excuting the statements above, the top of the stack starts
with `55`, `56`, `57`, `55`, `57`, `56`, etc, which are the ASCII
values for `7`, `8`, `9`, `7`, `9`, `8`, etc.

We will now enter a loop: if the stack is empty (or rather, if the top
of the stack is `0`), we end the program. Otherwise, we put the ASCII
values for `6`, `5`, `4`, `3`, `2`, `0`, and `1` on the stack. We then
take the first ten items from the stack, and print them as characters.
We finish the loop by pushing `5` on the stack twice, adding them (so
we get `10` on top of the stack), and printing this as a character.
This causes the program to print a newline after each pandigital number.

~~~~
>,,,,,,,,,,55+,  v
^                :
^"1023456"       _@
~~~~

Note that we enter the loop on the top right corner, going down.

FULL_PROGRAM

### C

In C, all variables are typed. So we define an array `tail` as an
array of `short`, since we're dealing with small enough numbers:

~~~~
# define SIZE 5

short tail [] = {789, 798, 879, 897, 978};
~~~~

We can now use a simple loop, using [`printf`](#) to print the
pandigital numbers:

~~~~
for (size_t i = 0; i < SIZE; i ++) {
    printf ("1023456%d\n", tail [i]);
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### csh

Just like in Bash, we can directly iterate over a list, without
first putting the permutations in an array:

~~~~
foreach i (789 798 879 897 978)
    echo 1023456$i
end
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Erlang

Erlang is a functional language. In Erlang, one typically does not
loop over an array; instead, one uses recursion, combined with
[*polymorphism*](##wiki:Polymorphism_(computer_science)).

We will first define a function `pandigital`, which takes an array
as argument. The array consists of the permutations, and the function
will print the pandigital numbers:

~~~~
pandigital ([])            -> ok;

pandigital ([Head | List]) ->
    io:fwrite ("1023456~w~n", [Head]),
    pandigital (List).
~~~~

If the function is called with an empty array, the function just
returns without further actions. Otherwise, the function is called
with a non-empty array, and we have to look at the second definition.
The first element of the array will be named `Head`, while the rest
of array is named `List`. We will print the pandigital number with
the permutation `Head`, and then recurse with `List`.

We call this function in the following way:

~~~~
main () ->
    pandigital ([789, 798, 879, 897, 978]).
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Go

To iterate over an array in Go, we use `for` in combination with `range`.
`for` is Go's only looping construct; `range` lets it iterate over
a slice. We can give it an array literal as argument, so no need for
a separate variable:

~~~~
for _, t := range [] int {789, 798, 879, 897, 978} {
    fmt . Printf ("1023456%d\n", t)
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Java

First, we create an array of integers:

~~~~
int [] tails = {789, 798, 879, 897, 978};
~~~~

We then use a `for` loop to iterate over the permutations. We add each
permutation to `1023456000`, and print it:

~~~~
int [] tails = {789, 798, 879, 897, 978};
for (int i: tails) {
    System . out . println (1023456000 + i);
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Lua

In Lua, we can directly iterate over a table literal (in Lua, arrays
are called tables). We use the function `ipairs`, which returns the
key-values pairs in order:

~~~~
for _, tail in ipairs ({789, 798, 879, 897, 978}) do
    print (1023456000 + tail)
end
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### m4

m4 doesn't have arrays. It doesn't have variables either. It just has
macros. Macros with can be redefined (in fact, redefining macros in m4
is quite common). And with some creative use of redefining macros,
we can simulate arrays:

~~~~
define(`tail_set',`define(format(``tail[%d]'',`$1'),`1023456$2')')dnl
~~~~

This defines a macro `tail_set`, which takes two arguments, `$1`, and
`$2`. The first acts as an index, the second as an argument. If the
macro `tail_set` gets invoked (say, with arguments `3` and `879`), the
result is that *another* macro is defined, one which defines `tail[3]`,
to expand to `1023456879`.

Next step is a macro which returns value in the simulated array:

~~~~
define(`tail',`defn(format(``tail[%d]'',`$1'))')dnl
~~~~

Note the use of `defn`: if its argument is an existing macro, it exands
to that macro, else it expands to nothing.

We can now populate the array:

~~~~
tail_set(`5',`789')dnl
tail_set(`4',`798')dnl
tail_set(`3',`879')dnl
tail_set(`2',`897')dnl
tail_set(`1',`978')dnl
~~~~

Note that we put the permutations into the simulate array in reversed
order. This is due to the following macro:

~~~~
define(`run',`tail($1)
ifelse($1,1,,`run(eval($1-1))')')dnl
~~~~

The macro `run` takes a single argument (`$1`). It first expands
to `tail($1)`, which is `1023456` followed by the corresponding
permutation. We then look at `$1`, if it equals `1`, we're done.
Else, we expand it to `run($1-1)`, which is a basic form of
recursion.

We can now finally kick off a myriad of expansions:

~~~~
run(5)dnl
~~~~

Note the use of `dnl` after each macro definition. Anything which isn't
a macro to be expanded, is copied as-is by m4. Including any newlines
following a macro definition. The `dnl` token prevents this.

FULL_PROGRAM

### Node.js

In Node.js, arrays are objects, with a
[`forEach`](#Global_Objects/Array/forEach) method.
In that method, we print the corresponding pandigital number to
the console, leaving us with a one-liner:

~~~~
[789, 798, 879, 897, 978] . forEach (t => console . log ("1023456" + t))
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Pascal

In Pascal, variable definition go into a section `var`. We can also
use this to initialize the variables. All variables are typed, and
array elements are of a specific type as well:

~~~~
var
    tails: array [1 .. 5] of integer = (789, 798, 879, 897, 978);
    i: integer;
~~~~

Looping is now easy:

~~~~
for i := 1 to 5 do begin
    writeln (1023456000 + tails [i]);
end
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Perl

In Perl, we can directly iterate over a list. Giving us a simple
one liner:

~~~~
say "1023456$_" for qw [789 798 879 897 978];
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### PHP

First, defining an array with permutations:

~~~~
$tails = array (789, 798, 879, 897, 978);
~~~~

Iteration happens with `foreach`, and PHP does interpolation in the
similar way as Perl and the shell:

~~~~
foreach ($tails as &$tail) {
    echo "1023456$tail\n";
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Python

In Python, we can directly iterate over a literal list, giving
use a very simple program:

~~~~
for t in [789, 798, 879, 897, 978]:
    print (1023456000 + t)
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### R

In R, vectors (as arrays are named), can be constructed with the
function `c()`:

~~~~
t <- c (789, 798, 879, 897, 978)
~~~~

Now, if we add number to a vector, the number is added to each
element. So, its easy to get a vector with the pandigital numbers
we need:

~~~~
t <- t + 1023456000
~~~~

We can directly print a vector use `cat`, which has the option
to specify a separator (space by default):

~~~~
cat (t, sep = "\n")
~~~~

We can combine all this, and end up with a one-liner, eliminating
an array variable:

~~~~
cat (c (789, 798, 879, 897, 978) + 1023456000, sep = "\n")
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Ruby

Just like Node.js, Ruby has a method on arrays to iterate over
the values: `each`. Which leads to the following one-liner:

~~~~
[789, 798, 879, 897, 978] . each {|t| puts (1023456000 + t)}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Scheme

Scheme has a unique way of defining an array:

~~~~
(define t #@1(789 798 879 897 978))
~~~~

`#()` is an array literal. The `@1` part indicates the first element
of the array has index `1`.

The looping construct in Scheme is called `do`:

~~~~
(do ((i 1 (1+ i)))
    ((> i (array-length t)))
    (format #t "1023456~d\n" (array-ref t i)))
~~~~

`do` takes three arguments. First argument is list of initializations;
each element of the list consists of a list with three elements:

* A variable name
* Its initial value
* An expression to calculate the next value

Here, we have `((i 1 (1+ i)))`, which means we have just one loop
variable, `i`, whose initial value is `1`, and which gets incremented
by `1` after each iteration of the loop. (`(1+ i)`).

The second argument of `do` is a list of conditions. If any of the
conditions is true, the loop is terminated. (This is opposite of
loop conditions in languages like C or Perl, where the loop terminates
if the condition is false). Here we have just one condition: 
`(> i (array-length t))`, which compares the value in `i` with 
the size of the array `t`. The expression is true if `i` is larger
than the array size.

The third argument of `do` is the body; it gets executed at each
iteration of the loop. In this body, we print the pandigital number.
`format` is the function used in Scheme to print formatted text.
`(array-ref t i)` returns the element from `t` on index `i`.

FULL_PROGRAM

### Tcl

In Tcl, we use the construct `array set` to initialize an array.
Note that in Tcl, arrays are associative, so we have to provide
indices as well:

~~~~
array set tail {0 789 1 798 2 879 3 897 4 978}
~~~~

We now have a simple `for` loop:

~~~~
for {set i 0} {$i < [array size tail]} {incr i} {
    puts "1023456$tail($i)"
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM
