# Perl Weekly Challenge 133: Integer Square Root

## [Challenge][task1]
>>>>
You are given a positive integer `$N`.

Write a script to calculate the integer square root of the given number.

Please avoid using built-in function. Find out more about it <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integer_square_root"><strong>here</strong></a>.
<<<<

### Examples

~~~~
Input: $N = 10
Output: 3

Input: $N = 27
Output: 5

Input: $N = 85
Output: 9

Input: $N = 101
Output: 10
~~~~

## Solution

The challenging part of this challenge is:

>>>>
Please avoid using built-in function.
<<<<

### Perl

Calculating the integer root of a number `$n` not using built-in functions
is easy. The module [`Math::Prime::Utils`](#) provides a function
`sqrtint` which does exactly what is asked. But it doesn't print it.
And both `say` and `print` are built-in functions.

So, we have to do something else. Our solution is pass the bucket to
AWK, and have AWK calculate the integer root. But how to call AWK?
Both [`exec`](#) and [`system`](#) are build-in functions, and so is
[`open`](#).

Which leaves us backticks (``` `` ```). But we can't just use backticks
and leave it like that, as the backticks run the given command, and
collect its output, which is returned. However, we cannot print that,
for the same reasons as explained above.

So, we will have AWK print directly to the terminal. AWK can redirect
output the same way as the shell can, using `> file` after a `print`
statement. `/dev/tty` is the pseudo-file representing the terminal.

There is one more snag we have to tackle. Since we're reading
numbers from standard input, every read number ends with a newline.
And AWK treats newlines as statement terminators without any regard
to context (basically, if the newline is not escaped, it will terminate
the statement). So, we have to get rid of it, but we cannot use
[`chop`](#) nor [`chomp`](#), due to the "no build-in" restriction.
But we have `s///` available, which we use to remove anything which
isn't an ASCII digit.

Which gives us the following program:

~~~~
`awk 'BEGIN {print (int (sqrt (${\s/[^0-9]+//gr}))) > "/dev/tty"}'` for <>;
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

[task1]: https://theweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-133/#TASK1

