# Perl Weekly Challenge 108: Locate Memory

## [Challenge](https://perlweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-108/#TASK1)

> Write a script to declare a variable or constant and print its
> location in the memory.


## Solution
This is a challenge which can only be solved in some languages.
Many, if not most, hide the actual memory locations from the user.

### Perl
There's not much to it. The
[`\`](https://perldoc.perl.org/perlop#Symbolic-Unary-Operators) operator returns
a reference to its argument. And a reference in numeric context 
is the memory location of the reference.

~~~~
say+0+\+0
~~~~

Since `+0` is a constant, `\+0` is a reference to it. If its an argument
of the addition operator (`+`), it's put in numeric context, and we get
memory address.
Adding `+0` to it is a no-op. So `+0+\+0` is the memory address of
the constant `+0`. Which we print with [`say`](#).

FULL_PROGRAM

### C

In C, the `&` operator returns a pointer to its argument; and a 
pointer is basically a memory location. We can print this straight
away using the `%p` specifier for [`printf`](#3), however, this
would print the address in hex format.

To use the same format as the output for our solutions in different
languages, we cast the pointer to a `long long`, and print this.

~~~~
int main (void) {
    int i;
    printf ("%lld\n", (long long) &i);
    return (0);
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM


### Fortran
In Fortran, the `loc` function returns the memory address
of a variable:

~~~~
program ch1
    implicit none
    integer :: i
    print *, loc(i)
end
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Go
Like C, in Go, `&` returns a references to its argument,
And you can just print that as a number:
~~~~
func main () {
    x := 0
    fmt . Printf ("%d\n", &x)
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Pascal
Pascal has pointers, but they aren't addresses in the sense they
are in C. Depending on the flavour of Pascal, you may, or may not
be able to get the memory location. We use the
[Free Pascal](https://www.freepascal.org/) compiler, which does
have a way to extract the address of a pointer. 

The function `addr` takes a pointer as argument, and returns a
pointer to a Word containing a memory address.
The latter pointer can be dereferenced and printed.

~~~~
var i: Integer;
    p: ^Integer;
    w: ^Word;

begin
    p := @i;
    w := addr (p);
    writeln (w^);
end.
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Python
The [`id`](#) function returns the identify of an object, which
is guaranteed to be unique. Due to an implementation detail, this
is the memory address.

~~~~
print (id (0))
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### R

In R, we have to work hard! We even have to work much harder than C.

~~~~
x <- 0
cat (sprintf ("%.0f\n",
         as.numeric (
             paste0 ("0x", 
                 substring (
                     sub (" .*$", "",
                          capture.output (.Internal (inspect (x)))), 2)))))
~~~~

We start off with `.Internal (inspect (x))` write a bunch of
information to standard output. This information looks like:

~~~~
@7fc083998d20 14 REALSXP g0c1 [REF(3)] (len=1, tl=0) 0
~~~~

The memory address starts right after the leading `@`. Since we want
to extract just the memory address, and remove the rest, we want to
capture what would normally be written to standard out. This is
what `capture.output` does -- it returns what otherwise would have
been written to standard output.

We then remove everything from the first space onwards, using
`sub`. This takes a pattern (`" .*$"`), a replacement (`""` -- the
empty string), and a string to act upon (the result of
`capture.output`).

Next step is to get rid of the leading `@`, by using `substring`.

We're now have the memory address, but as a string of hex digits. 
To turn this into a number, we first prepend `0x` using `paste0`
and then turn it into a number with `as.numeric`. We then turn
it back in to a string, but this time as a decimal number using
`sprintf`.

Finally, we print the memory address using `cat`.

FULL_PROGRAM

### Ruby

In Ruby, [`object_id`](https://apidock.com/ruby/Object/object_id) returns
a unique id. For objects which aren't `nil`, `true`, `false`, *Fixnums*,
*Symbols*, this returned number has a simple relation to the memory
location of the object.

~~~~
puts (Object . new . object_id << 1)
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM
