# Perl Weekly Challenge 138: Workdays

## [Challenge][task1]
>>>>
You are given a year, `$year` in 4-digits form.

Write a script to calculate the total number of workdays in the given year.

<blockquote>
For the task, we consider, Monday - Friday as workdays.

</blockquote>
<<<<

### Example 1

~~~~
Input: $year = 2021
Output: 261
~~~~

### Example 2

~~~~
Input: $year = 2020
Output: 262
~~~~


[task1]: https://theweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-138/#TASK1


## Discussion

Every year has 260, 261 or 262 workdays. The only variables are the on
which day of the week the year starts, and whether the year is a leap year
or not.

For regular years, if the year starts on weekday, it ends on the same 
weekday, and the year has 261 work days. If a regular year starts on a
weekend, it ends on a weekend, and the year has 260 work days.

For leap years, if the year starts on a Monday to Thursday, it ends on
Tuesday to Friday, giving the year 262 work days. If a leap year starts
on a Friday, it ends on a Saturday, giving 261 work days. If a leap year
starts on a Saturday, it ends on a Sunday, giving 260 work days. If a 
leap year starts on a Sunday, it ends on a Monday, giving the year 261
work days. So, we can just a lookup table, with 14 values (7 for regular
years, and 7 for leap years).

But we don't have to calculate the weekday of Jan 1. As long as we have
the weekday of a particular date, there will be fixed 'offset' from
that date to Jan 1 (the offset may differ between a leap year and a
regular year). For this challenge, we will use the
[doomsday value](#wiki:Doomsday_rule), which we have used as in
the [alternative solution][week137] of the challenge of [week 137][chal137].

This gives the following lookup table:

|====
& {th=1; cs=2} Regular Year & {th=1; cs=2} Leap Year \\
{th=1} Doomsday Value & {th=1} Jan 1 & {th=1} Work days
                      & {th=1} Jan 1 & {th=1} Work days \\
0 & Friday    & 261 & Thursday  & 262 \\
1 & Saturday  & 260 & Friday    & 261 \\
2 & Sunday    & 260 & Saturday  & 260 \\
3 & Monday    & 261 & Sunday    & 261 \\
4 & Tuesday   & 261 & Monday    & 262 \\
5 & Wednesday & 261 & Tuesday   & 262 \\
6 & Thursday  & 261 & Wednesday & 262 \\
====|


[week137]: https://abigail.github.io/HTML/Perl-Weekly-Challenge/week-137-1.html
[chal137]: https://theweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-137/#TASK1

## Live Demo

Enter a year in the ([proleptic](#wiki:Proleptic_Gregorian_calendar))
Gregorian calendar, and hit the Calculate button to calculate the
number of work days in that year.

Enter a year: <input type = "number" id = year> 
<button onclick = "work_days ()">Calculate</button>

<span id = "result"></span>

## Solution

Our solutions will be reading years from standard input (one year per
line), and write the number of work days of those year to standard
output.

### Perl

First, we copy the calculation of the doomsday value and the check
whether a year is a leap year from the previous week:

~~~~
my $SUNDAY    = 0;
my $MONDAY    = 1;
my $TUESDAY   = 2;
my $WEDNESDAY = 3;
my $THURSDAY  = 4;
my $FRIDAY    = 5;
my $SATURDAY  = 6;

sub doomsday ($year = $_) {
    use integer;
    my $anchor   = ($TUESDAY, $SUNDAY, $FRIDAY, $WEDNESDAY) [($year / 100) % 4];
    my $y        = $year % 100;
    my $doomsday = ((($y / 12) + ($y % 12) + (($y % 12) / 4)) + $anchor) % 7;
    $doomsday;
}

sub is_leap ($year = $_) {
    ($year % 400 == 0) || ($year % 4 == 0) && ($year % 100 != 0) ? 1 : 0
}
~~~~

Then it's just a matter of defining a lookup table, reading the
input, and printing the value we can look up:

~~~~
while (<>) {
    say $lookup [is_leap] [doomsday]
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Other languages

We also have implementation in a bunch of different language; they all
use the same algorithm as the Perl implementation:

[AWK](#github),
[Bash](#github),
[bc](#github),
[C](#github),
[Go](#github),
[Java](#github),
[Lua](#github),
[Node.js](#github),
[Pascal](#github),
[Python](#github),
[R](#github),
[Ruby](#github),
[Scheme](#github), and
[Tcl](#github).
