# Perl Weekly Challenge 122: Average of Stream

## [Challenge][task1]
> You are given a stream of numbers, `@N`.
> 
> Write a script to print the average of the stream at every point.
> 


### Example
>     Input: @N = (10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, ...)
>     Output:      10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, ...
>     
> *   Average of first number is `10`.
> *   Average of first 2 numbers `(10 + 20) / 2 = 15`.
> *   Average of first 3 numbers `(10 + 20 + 30) / 3 = 20`.
> *   Average of first 4 numbers `(10 + 20 + 30 + 40) / 4 = 25` and so on.
>     

## Solution

This is a pretty simple task. We will be reading numbers one by one,
keeping a running sum of the numbers, and the amount of numbers read
so far -- updating those values for each number read. We then print
the quotient of the sum and amount of numbers.

We will be assuming the numbers are separated by new lines (so, one
number per line).

Unless indicated otherwise, our solutions will use the following
variables:

* `n` for the current number read from input.
* `s` the sum of the numbers read so far.
* `c` the count of the numbers read so far.

### Perl

We will be using the `-p` and `-l` flags. `-p` makes that the program
is executed for each line of the input, with the line available in `$_`.
Afterwards, the content of `$_` is printed.
The `-l` strips off the newline of the input, and adds a newline
when printing.

Instead of using a counter to count the amount of numbers read, we
will make use of the special variable `$.`, which contains the current
line number.

~~~~
$_=($;+=$_)/$.
~~~~

We keep the running sum of the numbers read so far in the variable `$;`.
Each number read will be added to it (`$; += $_`); this sum we then
divide with `$.` and assign back to `$_`, which is then printed due
to the `-p` flag.

FULL_PROGRAM

### AWK

AWK executes its program for each line of input, splits the line on
whitespace, making the fields available in `$1`, `$2`, etc. Since
we just have a number per line, all we need is `$1`.

Just like in Perl, there is a special variable which contains the
current line number -- `NR` (number of records). This leads to
the following one-liner:

~~~~
{print ((s += $1) / NR)}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Bash

In Bash we have another one liner. No special variables here.

~~~~
while read n; do echo $(((s += n) / ++ c)); done
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Basic

In our Basic solution, we assume the input is terminated with a `0`.

~~~~
100 INPUT n
110 IF n = 0 THEN END
150 s = s + n
160 c = c + 1
170 PRINT s / c
200 GOTO 100
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### bc

Just like in our Basic solution, we expect the input to be terminated
with a `0`:

~~~~
while (1) {
    n = read ()
    if (n == 0) {break}
    (s += n) / ++ c
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Befunge-93

Befunge-93 does not have any variables. It has a stack, and we can write
values into the `80x24` grid which makes up the program.

We keep the sum of numbers at the bottom of the stack, while we track
the amount of numbers read so far at position `(8, 8)`.

~~~~
088p 0 >>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>v
& :1+!#@_ + : 88g1+ :88p / . 55+, >
~~~~

The first line is used to do some initializations. We write a `0` to 
position `(8, 8)` (`088p`), then put a `0` on the stack, indicating the
sum of numbers seen so far.

The second line of the program is the main loop. We start by reading a
number, and putting it on the stack (`&`). If we have reached the end 
of input, `-1` is put on the stack. So we start by checking for that
condition, and if it is `-1`, we terminate: `:1+!#@_`. This works as
follows:

* `:`: Duplicate the top of the stack.
* `1`: Push `1` on the stack.
* `+`: Pop the top two numbers of the stack, and push back the sum of those.
* `!`: Pop a number from the stack. If that number is `0`, push `1`,
       else push `0`.
* `#`: Skip over the next command.
* `@`: Terminate the program. But initially, we skip over this command.
* `_`: Pop a number from the stack. If the number is `0`, continue to
       the right. Else, continue to the left. 

So, if have reached the end of the input, we have `-1` on top of the stack.
Adding `1` leaves `0` on top of the stack, which due to the `!` becomes
a `1`. We first skip over the `@`, but then the `_` sends us back to
the `@`, terminating the program. If, on the other hand, we have read
a number, we continue with the rest of the program, leaving the read
number on top of the stack.

So, we now have two numbers on the stack: the sum of the numbers, up
to the previous number read, and the new number read. We first add
the two numbers (`+`), then duplicate the result (`:`).

We now have to increment the amount of numbers read: first we fetch
the current amount and put it on the stack (`88g`), then we add `1`
to it (`1+`). We then write the new amount back, leaving a copy on
the stack (`:88p`). 

At this moment, we have three values on the stack: the amount of
numbers on top of the stack, then twice the sum of the numbers.
We replace the top two numbers on the stack by their quotient (`/`),
and print this value (`.`). We then have to print a newline; a newline
has ASCII value `10`, so we have two `5`s on the stack, add them (`+`),
and print the top of the stack (which is now `10`) as an ASCII character (`,`).

FULL_PROGRAM

### C

The C program is pretty straight forward. Simple enough we don't even
need `malloc`:

~~~~
int main (void) {
    int n;
    int s = 0;
    int c = 0;

    while (scanf ("%d", &n) == 1) {
        printf ("%d\n", (s += n) / ++ c);
    }

    return (0);
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Go

The Go program is similar to the C program. A bit more verbose because
we cannot use `+=` or prefix `++` as part of an expression.

~~~~
func main () {
    var n, s, c int;
    s = 0
    c = 0
    for {
        var _, err = fmt . Scanf ("%d", &n)
        if (err != nil) {
            break
        }
        s += n
        c ++
        fmt . Printf ("%d\n", s / c)
    }
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Java

Just like in C and Go, we scan for integers to read the next number:

~~~~
public class ch1 {
    public static void main (String [] args) {
        Scanner scanner = new Scanner (System . in);
        int s = 0, c = 0;
        while (scanner . hasNext ()) {
            System . out . println ((s += scanner . nextInt ()) / ++ c);
        }
    }
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Lua

In Lua, we have explicitly convert strings to numbers:

~~~~
for n in io . lines () do
    s = s + tonumber (n)
    c = c + 1
    print (s / c)
end
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Node.js

Conversion from strings to numbers in Node.js is done with unary `+`:

~~~~
  require ('readline')
. createInterface ({input: process . stdin})   
. on              ('line', n => {console . log ((s +=+ n) / ++ c)})
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Pascal

Nothing special here:

~~~~
begin
    while not eof () do begin
        readln (n);
        s := s + n;
        c := c + 1;
        writeln (s div c);
    end
end.
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Python

~~~~
for n in fileinput . input ():
    s = s + int (n)
    c = c + 1
    print (s // c)
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### R

In R, assignment is done using the `<-` operator:

~~~~
repeat {
    n <- readLines (stdin, n = 1)
    if (length (n) == 0) {
        break
    }
    cat ((s <- s + as.integer (n)) / (c <- c + 1), "\n")
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Ruby

~~~~
ARGF . each_line do
    |n|
    s += n . to_i
    c += 1
    puts (s / c)
end
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Scheme

Scheme doesn't have loops, but it has recursion. And its operators are
all prefix operators.

~~~~
(define (main)
    (define n (read))
    (if (not (eof-object? n))
        (begin
            (set! s (+ s n))
            (set! c (+ c 1))
            (format #t "~d\n" (/ s c))
            (main)
        )
    )
)

(main)
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Tcl

~~~~
while {[gets stdin n] >= 0} {
    set s [expr $s + $n]
    set c [expr $c +  1]
    puts  [expr $s / $c]
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM


[task1]: https://theweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-122/#TASK1

