# Perl Weekly Challenge 123: Square Points

## [Challenge][task2]
>>>>
You are given coordinates of four points i.e. `(x1, y1)`, `(x2, y2)`,
`(x3, y3)` and `(x4, y4)`.

Write a script to find out if the given four points form a square.
<<<<

[task2]: https://theweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-123/#TASK2

### Example

~~~~
Input: x1 = 10, y1 = 20
       x2 = 20, y2 = 20
       x3 = 20, y3 = 10
       x4 = 10, y4 = 10
Output: 1 as the given coordinates form a square.

Input: x1 = 12, y1 = 24
       x2 = 16, y2 = 10
       x3 = 20, y3 = 12
       x4 = 18, y4 = 16
Output: 0 as the given coordinates doesn't form a square.
~~~~

## Solution

[Squares](#wiki) are [quadrilaterals](#wiki) which special properties.
The defining property we will be using is that a square is a [rhombus](#wiki)
with diagonals of even length. A rhombus is a quadrilateral where all
sides are of equal length.

So, we have to compare the distances of various pairs of points. The
distance between two points \((x_k, y_k)\) and \((x_l, y_l)\) is given
by the formula 
\[
    \sqrt{(x_k - x_l)^2 + (y_k - y_l)^2}
\]

So, if we want to compare if the distance between points
\((x_k, y_k)\) and \((x_l, y_l)\) is equal to the distance
between points \((x_m, y_m)\) and \((x_n, y_n)\), we 
need to check that

\[
    \sqrt{(x_k - x_l)^2 + (y_k - y_l)^2} =
    \sqrt{(x_m - x_n)^2 + (y_m - y_n)^2}
\]

But we can simplify this. We don't need the actual distance, all we
need to know is whether two distances are equal. And if \(d_1 = d_2\),
then \(d_1^2 = d_2^2\). So it suffices to check

\[
    (x_k - x_l)^2 + (y_k - y_l)^2 =
    (x_m - x_n)^2 + (y_m - y_n)^2
\]

For most of our solutions, we will define a method `dist`, which gets
the coordinates of two points, and which returns the square of the
distance between the points.

We then check whether the distance between points 1 and 2,
between points 2 and 3, between points 3 and 4, and between points 4 and 1,
are all equal, and that the distances between points 1 and 3, and
between points 2 and 4 (the diagonals) are equal.

Below, when the talk about the distance between two points, or the length
of an edge or diagonal, we actually mean the square of that distance/length.

### Perl

The subroutine `dist`:

~~~~
sub dist ($x1, $y1, $x2, $y2) {($x1 - $x2) ** 2 + ($y1 - $y2) ** 2}
~~~~

Then the check becomes easy. `$_` contains the input:

~~~~
my  ($x1, $y1, $x2, $y2, $x3, $y3, $x4, $y4) = split;
say dist ($x1, $y1, $x2, $y2) == dist ($x2, $y2, $x3, $y3) ==
    dist ($x3, $y3, $x4, $y4) == dist ($x4, $y4, $x1, $x2) &&
    dist ($x1, $y1, $x3, $y3) == dist ($x2, $y2, $x4, $y4) ? 1 : 0
~~~~

Note that in modern versions of Perl, we can *chain* comparisons.
That means, `expr1 == expr2 == expr3 == expr4` is equivalent to
`expr1 == expr2 && expr2 == expr3 && expr3 == expr4 && expr4 == expr1`.

FULL_PROGRAM

### Other languages

We have solutions in [AWK](#github), [Bash](#github), [Bc](#github),
[C](#github), [Go](#github), [Java](#github), [Lua](#github),
[Node.js](#github), [Pascal](#github), [Python](#github), [Ruby](#github),
[Scheme](#github) and [Tcl](#github), which are all very similar to
the Perl solutions.

There are slight variations. Some languages don't have an exponentiation
operator, in which case we just multiply factors by themselves. For
instance, the `dist` function in Go looks like:

~~~~
func dist (x1 int, y1 int, x2 int, y2 int) int {
    return (x1 - x2) * (x1 - x2) + (y1 - y2) * (y1 - y2);
}
~~~~

And in most languages, comparisons cannot be chained, so we have
to split them into multiple comparisons. For instance, the test
in Tcl looks like:

~~~~
if {[dist $x1 $y1 $x2 $y2] == [dist $x2 $y2 $x3 $y3] &&
    [dist $x2 $y2 $x3 $y3] == [dist $x3 $y3 $x4 $y4] &&
    [dist $x3 $y3 $x4 $y4] == [dist $x4 $y4 $x1 $y1] &&
    [dist $x1 $y1 $x3 $y3] == [dist $x2 $y2 $x4 $y4]} {
    puts 1
} else {
    puts 0
}
~~~~

### R

Our solution in R is slightly different. With the input in `line`,
we first split the input on spaces, giving us an vector with the
coordinates (as strings):

~~~~
parts <- strsplit (line, " ")
~~~~

Next, we create two vectors, `x`, and `y`, holding the x and y coordinates
for the four points:

~~~~
x <- as.numeric (parts [[1]] [c (1, 3, 5, 7)])
y <- as.numeric (parts [[1]] [c (2, 4, 6, 8)])
~~~~

The `c` function creates an vector with the given elements, and we use
this vector to slice out the relevant numbers. `as.numeric` maps strings
to numbers.

Now we create two lists with indices:

~~~~
i1 <- c (1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 3)
i2 <- c (2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 4)
~~~~

These correspond to the points we want the distance between (between the
first and second vertex of the square, the second and third vertex of
the square, etc -- the last two sets are the diagonals).

Now we calculate all the distances in one operation:

~~~~
z <- (x [i1] - x [i2]) ^ 2 + (y [i1] - y [i2]) ^ 2
~~~~

This works, because in R, operations are done on vectors, and
basic arithmetic operations are done on each element. Now `z [1]` to
`z [4]` contain the lengths of the edges of the square, and `z [5]`
and `z [6]` contain the lengths of the diagonals.

We can now do the comparisons:

~~~~
if (z [1] == z [2] && z [2] == z [3] && z [3] == z [4] && z [5] == z [6]) {
    cat ("1\n")
}
else {
    cat ("0\n")
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM
