# Perl Weekly Challenge 129: Root Distance

## [Challenge][task1]
>>>>
You are given a tree and a node of the given tree.

Write a script to find out the distance of the given node from the root.
<<<<

### Example 1

~~~~
Tree:
        1
       / \
      2   3
           \
            4
           / \
          5   6

Node: 6
Output: 3 as the distance of given node 6 from the root (1).

Node: 5
Output: 3

Node: 2
Output: 1

Node: 4
Output: 2
~~~~

### Example 2

~~~~
Tree:
        1
       / \
      2   3
     /     \
    4       5
     \     /
      6   7
     / \
    8   9

Node: 7
Output: 3 as the distance of given node 6 from the root (1).

Node: 8
Output: 4

Node: 6
Output: 3
~~~~

## Discussion

### Lack of input specificition, once again.

Once again a challenge where we take a tree as input, without a clue
on how the input looks like, except for some tiny examples which don't
scale. And this time, we're not even given we have a binary tree -- just
a tree. I mean, it's all fine and dandy if we have a tree where no node
has more than two children, and many have just one. But what if a node
has 27 children? 

Therefore, we'll just magic will gives us the tree, and we're not going
to waste time writing code reading input. Magic will give us the tree
at the start of the program. We'll assume the tree is given as a hash:
each node of the tree is a key in the hash, and the values of the hash
are arrays, where each element of the hash represents an edge from the
node to one of its neighbours. (This means, we treat edges in the tree
to not be directed).

### Contradiction between specification and examples

The specification states we're given a tree, and a node. Yet, the examples
have several nodes per tree.

We can only conclude that the input specification is utterly useless, and,
yet again, we assume magic which gives us the node.

## Solution

To find the shortest path between two nodes in a graph, one can use a bog
standard [breadth-first search](#wiki).
A tree is a (connected) graph without loops,
but that doesn't give us any benefits, so we just assume we have a graph.
A breadth-first search takes time \(\mathcal{O}(|V| + |E|)\), where
\(V\) is the set of vertices, and \(E\) the set of edges. Since our input
is a tree, we have \(|E| < |V|\), hence our algorithm runs in
\(\mathcal{O}(|V|)\), which is optimal.

### Perl

Using magic to read in the input, assuming for each input, the root is
labeled \(1\).

~~~~
my $graph  = do {...};
my $target = do {...};
my $root   = 1;
~~~~

For our search, we're using a queue (named `@todo`), where each element
of the queue consists of a node to be processed, and the distance of
the root to that node. We initialize the queue with the root node itself,
which has distance `0`. We use a hash `%seen` to keep track of the
nodes we have processed:

~~~~
my @todo = ([$root, 0]);
my %seen;
~~~~

While our queue is non-empty, we pop off the first element. If this is
our target, we report the distance, and we're done. If we have already
processed this node, we continue with the next node in the queue.
Else, for each of the neighbours of the current node, we push this node
to the queue, with a distance which is one more than the distance of the
root to the current node:

~~~~
while (@todo) {
    my ($node, $distance) = @{shift @todo}
    if ($node == $target) {
        say $distance;
        exit;
    }
    next if $seen {$node} ++;
    push @todo => map {[$_, $distance + 1]} @{$$graph {$node}}
}
~~~~

If we haven't found the target node, either the target doesn't exist,
or the graph isn't connected, and the target node and the root are
not in the same component:

~~~~
say "$target does not exist, or is not connected to the root node";
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Other languages

Other languages don't have magic to create trees.

[task1]: https://theweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-129/#TASK1

