# Perl Weekly Challenge 149: Largest Square

## [Challenge][task2]
>>>>
Given a number base, derive the largest perfect square with no repeated digits and return it as a string. (For base>10, use &lsquo;A&rsquo;..&lsquo;Z&rsquo;.)
<<<<

### Example:

~~~~
    f(2)=&quot;1&quot;
    f(4)=&quot;3201&quot;
    f(10)=&quot;9814072356&quot;
    f(12)=&quot;B8750A649321&quot;
~~~~

[task2]: https://theweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-149/#TASK2

## Discussion

This is sequence [A287298](#oeis) in
[The On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences](https://oeis.org).

First thing we should notice that the OEIS only lists entries up
to base 22, while skipping the entry for 21.

Perhaps this is really hard to calculate? The OEIS shows an example
program (in Python):

~~~~
from gmpy2 import isqrt, mpz, digits
def A287298 (n): # assumes n <= 62
    m  = isqrt (mpz ('' . join (digits (i, n) for i in range (n - 1, -1, -1)), n))
    m2 = m ** 2
    d  = digits (m2, n)
    while len (set (d)) < len (d):
        m  -= 1
        m2 -= 2 * m + 1
        d   = digits (m2, n)
    return int (m2)
~~~~

Ouch! This starts by creating the largest number in the give base
without repeats. Starting with the integer square root of that number, 
it checks whether its square does not contain any repeats. If not,
it subtracts 1 from the square root, and checks the square for repeats
again. Rinse and repeat until there is a winner. (There will always
be a square number without repeats, as `1` is such a square in any base).

For most bases up to 20, this goes reasonably fast, but base 17 already
requires more than 2 billion checks. (Base 21 requires at least 20 trillion
checks -- and counting).

This is too slow to run each time we want to find the largest square
without repeats in a base. Instead, we will make use of the preprocessed
values:

* We get the values of bases up to 20 from
[the list on OEIS for sequence A287298](https://oeis.org/A287298/b287298.txt).
* We get the value for base 22 from the entry for [A287298](#oeis).
* We let the above Python program run for a while, and derive the
  values for bases 23, 24 and 25. (We may find more after this blog
  was written).

The values we get, either from the OEIS, or the output of the above
Python program are in decimal. To convert this to the appropriate base,
we make use of `bc` (here `$value` is the value we want to convert to
base `$base`):

~~~~
my $value_in_base = `echo "obase=$base; $value" | bc`
~~~~

This works fine for bases up to 16, where bc uses letters `A` to `F`.

For bases exceeding 16, bc uses a different system: then each "*digit*"
in base `b` is represented by two digit decimal number less than `b`;
the two digit numbers separated by spaces. To complicate things further,
for larger bases, this resulting representation may exceed the default
line width of bc. So, we use the following code to get our numbers in
the appropriate base:

~~~~
my @chars = (0 .. 9, 'A' .. 'Z');
$ENV {BC_LINE_LENGTH} = 1000;

my $value_in_base = `echo "obase=$base; $value" | bc`
                  =~ s/ ([0-9]{2})/$chars [0 + $1]/egr
                  =~ s/\n//r;
~~~~

Find the [full preprocessing program](https://github.com/Abigail/perlweeklychallenge-club/blob/master/challenge-149/abigail/data/preprocess) on 
[GitHub](https://github.com/).

## Solution

### Perl

FULL_PROGRAM
