# Perl Weekly Challenge 103: Chinese Zodiac

## [Challenge](https://theweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-103/#TASK1)

> You are given a year `$year`.
> 
> Write a script to determine the Chinese Zodiac for the given year `$year`.
> Please check out wikipage for more information about it.
>
> **The animal cycle: Rat, Ox, Tiger, Rabbit, Dragon, Snake, Horse,
> Goat, Monkey, Rooster, Dog, Pig.**<br>
> **The element cycle: Wood, Fire, Earth, Metal, Water.**

### Examples

#### Example 1
>     Input: 2017
>     Output: Fire Rooster

#### Example 2
>     Input: 1938
>     Output: Earth Tiger

## Upping the ante
If we're following the given link, we learn there is also a Yin/Yang
cycle. So, we include this as well in the output.

## Solution
The *animal* cycle is also known as the [*Earthly
Branches*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earthly_Branches). There
are twelve branches, represented by animals. An animal is used for
one year, followed by the next animal, in a cycle which repeats
every twelve years.

The *element* cycle is also known as the [*Heavenly
Stems*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heavenly_Stems). There are
ten stems, represented by elements. An element is used for two
years, followed by the next element, in a cycle which repeats every
ten years.

The Yin/Yang cycle repeats every two years, with odd years being
Yin, and even years Yang.

This leads to a cycle which [repeats every sixty
years](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sexagenary_cycle), 60 being
the [least common
multiple](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/LeastCommonMultiple.html)
of 12, 10 and 2.

We will create the cycle by having three arrays; one array for each
cycle. The Earthly Branches will be a 12 element array, the Heavenly
Stems will be a 10 element array -- each element will be repeated,
and the Yin and Yang will just be two elements. We will place the
array elements in such away that the corresponding entries for the
year `0` will be in index `0`. That way, we can just take the year,
mod it by the size of the array, and use the result as an index.

### Perl
First, we create the arrays:

~~~~
my $yin_yang         = [qw [Yang Yin]];
my $heavenly_stems   = [map {($_) x 2} qw [Metal Water Wood Fire Earth]];
my $earthly_branches = [qw [Monkey  Rooster  Dog    Pig   Rat    Ox
                            Tiger   Rabbit   Dragon Snake Horse  Goat]];
~~~~

We then read years from standard input, and fetch the parts from
the arrays so we can print them:

~~~~
while (my $year = <>) {
    $, = " ";
    say map {$$_ [$year % @$_]} $yin_yang, $heavenly_stems, $earthly_branches;
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM
