# Perl Weekly Challenge 134: Distinct Terms Count

## [Challenge][task2]
>>>>
You are given 2 positive numbers, `$m` and `$n`.

Write a script to generate multiplcation table and display count of distinct terms.
<<<<

[task2]: https://theweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-134/#TASK2

### Example 1

~~~~
Input: $m = 3, $n = 3
Output:

      x | 1 2 3
      --+------
      1 | 1 2 3
      2 | 2 4 6
      3 | 3 6 9

Distinct Terms: 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9
Count: 6
~~~~

### Example 2

~~~~
Input: $m = 3, $n = 5
Output:

      x | 1  2  3  4  5
      --+--------------
      1 | 1  2  3  4  5
      2 | 2  4  6  8 10
      3 | 3  6  9 12 15

Distinct Terms: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, 15
Count: 11
~~~~

## Discussion

The challenge description talks about two things: a multiplication
table (to be generated), and a count of distinct terms (to be displayed).
The examples show **three** things: a multiplication table, a list of
distinct terms, and a count.

Now, the weekly challenge has a long history of examples where it's not
clear where the expected output ends, and where the description of why
this is the right answer starts. 

The only thing of which it's clear which needs to be outputted is the
count of distinct terms. 

Of the others, the table and list of terms, we assume to be explaination.

If not, then please, please, consider spending a minute more on drafting
the challenge, and make it clear what you expect.

## Solution

We will just generate all the products
\(p = i \cdot j, 1 \leq i \leq m, 1 \leq j \leq n\). This is more than
we need, as we will be calculating both \(i \cdot j\) and \(j \cdot i\)
for all \(1 \leq i < j \leq \text{ min} (m, n)\), but that will be less
than twice the optimal number of products.

To keep track of the different products, we will store them in either
an array/list/vector, or a hash/map/table/associative array, depending on
the language. 

To get the count, we either get the number of elements stored, or we
keep a running count, incrementing the count each time we get a product
we have not seen yet.

Below is a matrix showing which solution we have for which language.
The implementations in the languages listed in the column
labelled **Array** use an array as the structure which keeps track
of seen products, while the column labelled **Hash** list implementations
in languages using a hash as structure.

The row labelled **Size** lists implementations in languages where we get
the size of the structure to determine the number of distinct products,
while the row labelled **Count** lists implementations in languages
where we have a running count.

|====
             & {th=1} Hash
             & {th=1} Array \\
{th=1} Size  & [AWK](#github),     [Bash](#github), [Java](#github),
               [Node.js](#github), [Perl](#github), [Python](#github),
               [Ruby](#github),    [Tcl](#github)
             & [R](#github) \\
{th=1} Count & [Go](#github), [Lua](#github), [Scheme](#github) 
             & [bc](#github), [C](#github),   [Pascal](#github)
====|

For each of the four techniques, we will show one solution.


All our solutions read pairs of numbers from standard input, one pair
per line. For each pair, we print the number of distinct products to
standard output.

### Tcl

Our Tcl solution is an example where we're using a hash to keep track
of which products we have seen, and where we use the size of the resulting
structure to display the count.

In Tcl, arrays are associative arrays (after all, *everything is a string*
in Tcl). 

~~~~
while {[gets stdin line] >= 0} {
    lassign [split $line " "] n m
    array set seen { }
    for {set i 1} {$i <= $n} {incr i} {
        for {set j 1} {$j <= $m} {incr j} {
            set seen([expr $i * $j]) 1
        }
    }
    puts [array size seen]
}
~~~~

An array is defined using the `array set` statement. The array is
called `seen`, and we initialize it to an empty list.

The `array size` statement returns the number of elements in the
array.

FULL_PROGRAM

### Lua

In Lua, we also use a hash (which Lua calls tables; Lua doesn't have
different objects for arrays or hashes). But instead of finding out
the size afterwards, for each product generated, we check if it is
already in the table. If not, we increment a count.

~~~~
for line in io . lines () do
    local _, _, m, n = line : find ("([0-9]+)%s+([0-9]+)")
    local seen = {}
    local count = 0
    for i = 1, m do
        for j = 1, n do
            if seen [i * j] == nil then
                seen [i * j] = 1
                count = count + 1
            end
        end
    end
    print (count)
end
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### bc

bc does not have hashes, just arrays. So, we start off with an array
of \(m \cdot n\) elements, all initialized to `0`. For each produced
product, we set the value on that index to `1`. Each time we set a
value from `0` to `1`, we increment a count.

Now, it sounds expensive to use an array instead of a hash, as there
are many numbers between 1 and \(i \cdot j\) which aren't a product.
However, for \(m, n < 10000\), about 25% of the numbers between 
\(1\) and \(10000^2\) can be written as a product of two numbers
less than \(10000\). So the waste isn't too bad.

~~~~
while (1) {
    m = read(); if (m == 0) break
    n = read(); if (n == 0) break
    for (i = 1; i <= m * n; i ++) {
        s[i] = 0
    }
    count = 0
    for (i = 1; i <= n; i ++) {
        for (j = 1; j <= m; j ++) {
            if (s[i * j] == 0) {
                count = count + 1
                s[i * j] = 1
            }
        }
    }
    count
}

~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM


### R

For our R solution, we also make use of an array (or vector as they
are called in R). The array is initialized to all `0`, and for each
product we put a `1` in the array. To get the number of different
products, we just calculate the sum of all elements in the array;
R has a build in `sum` which does that.

~~~~
stdin <- file ('stdin', 'r')
repeat {
    line <- readLines (stdin, n = 1)
    if (length (line) == 0) {
        break
    }
    parts <- strsplit (line, " ")

    m <- as.numeric (parts [[1]] [[1]])
    n <- as.numeric (parts [[1]] [[2]])

    seen <- replicate (m * n, 0)

    for (i in 1 : m) {
        for (j in 1 : n) {
            seen [[i * j]] <- 1
        }
    }

    cat (sum (seen), "\n")
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM
