# Perl Weekly Challenge 119: Sequence without 1-on-1

## [Challenge](https://perlweeklychallenge.org/blog/perl-weekly-challenge-119/#TASK2)

> Write a script to generate sequence starting at `1`. Consider the
> increasing sequence of integers which contain only `1`s, `2`s, and
> `3`s, and do not have any doublets of `1`s > like below. Please accept
> a positive integer `$N` and print the `$N`th term in the generated sequence.
>
> > 1, 2, 3, 12, 13, 21, 22, 23, 31, 32, 33, 121, 122, 123, 131, ...

## Solution

I could not think of a way to directly generate the \(N\)th number
of the sequence.

But there is a straight forward way to, given a number in the
sequence, generate the next number in the sequence.

Let the sequence be \(a_0, a_1, a_2, \ldots\). Let \(a_n\) be a number
in the sequence, such that
\(a_n = d_1 d_2 d_3 \ldots d_m c \overbrace{3 \ldots 3}^{k \text{ times}},
c \neq 3 \).
That is, \(a_n\) consists of a possibly empty, sequence of digits \(d_i\)
then a digit, \(c\),
not equal to \(3\), followed by a, possibly empty, sequence of \(k\) \(3\)s.
So, \(c\) is the last digit in \(a_n\) which is not a \(3\). 
If \(a_n\) consists of only \(3\)s, we can always prepend \(a_n\) with
a \(0\), so, in that case, \(c = 0\).

We now first construct an intermediate number
\(t = d_1 d_2 d_3 \ldots d_m (c + 1) \overbrace{1 \ldots 1}^{k \text{ times}}\).

Then we construct \(a_{n + 1}\) from \(t\) by replacing each non-overlapping
\(11\) in \(t\) by \(12\). Note that the sequence \(d_i\) cannot contain
the pattern \(11\); otherwise, \(a_n\) is not part of the sequence.
Also, the only way for \(c + 1\) to be \(1\) is if the sequence \(d_i\)
is empty (in that case, \(a_n\) consists of only \(3\)s).

With this in mind, it's easy to generate the generate the \(N\)th number:
starting with \(0\), we apply the construction above \(N\) times.

In each of our implementations below, we start of with prepending a
\(0\) to number. That way, we will always find a \(c\) as above. And
we'll strip off a leading \(0\) when we're done.

### Perl

First, the method which takes a number in the sequence, and return 
the next number. It makes extensive use of the `/r` modifier on
substitutions: this tells perl not to modify the string it's acting on,
but to return the modified string instead.

~~~~
sub next_num ($prev_num) {
    "0$prev_num" =~ s!([012])(3*)$!($1 + 1) . ($2 =~ s/3/1/rg)!re
                 =~ s!11!12!rg
                 =~ s!^0!!r
}
~~~~

The pattern in the first substitution captures the last digit which
is not a `3`, and any `3`s following that. This is replaced with the
non-`3` digit incremented by `1`, and a string of `1`s of the same
length as the string of `3`. We do this by using the `/e` modifier, 
which tells Perl to execute the replacement part, and use the return
value as the replacement. Note that we use another substitution here --
with a modern enough Perl, the regexp engine is reentrant. 

The second substitution simply replaces any `11` with a `12` -- this
is the part which prevents a `1-1` sequence.

The final substitution removes any leading `0` which still may be there.

We can now calculate the `$N`th element of the sequence, where
`$_` contains `$N`:

~~~~
my $n = 0;
$n = next_num $n for 1 .. $_;
say $n;
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### AWK

AWK doesn't have capture groups (GNU AWK does though), so we have to
work a little bit harder. It does have `RSTART`, which indicates the
position in the string where the match started , and `RLENGTH`, which
indicates the length of the matched substring. Our `next_num` function
then becomes:

~~~~
function next_num (prev_num, tail) {
    match (prev_num, /3*$/)
    tail = substr (prev_num, RSTART)
~~~~

Now `tail` contains the trailing `3`s of `prev_num` (`tail` may be the
empty string). We first replace the `3`s with `1`s:

~~~~
    gsub (/3/, 1, tail)
~~~~

We now put `tail` back into `prev_num`, after incrementing the number
before the trailing `3`s. If no such number exists (that is, `prev_number`
consists of just `3`s) we just put a `1` before `tail`:

~~~~
    if (RLENGTH == length (prev_num)) {
        prev_num = 1 tail
    }
    else {
        prev_num = substr (prev_num, 1, RSTART - 2)      \
                  (substr (prev_num, RSTART - 1, 1) + 1) \
                   tail
    }
~~~~

Now we just replace any `11` with `12`, and return the result.

~~~~
    gsub (/11/, "12", prev_num)

    return prev_num
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM


### Bash

The Bash function to calculate the next number is surprisingly compact:

~~~~
function next_number () {
     [[ 0$1 =~ ^(.*)([012])(3*)$ ]]
     next_num=${BASH_REMATCH[1]}$((BASH_REMATCH[2] + 1))${BASH_REMATCH[3]//3/1}
     next_num=${next_num//11/12}
     next_num=${next_num/0/}
}
~~~~

The first line capturings any leading digits, then the last digit
which is not a `3`, and the any trailing `3`s. Capture groups are
availabe in the array `BASH_REMATCH`.

A new number is constructed by concatenating the first part with
the second (incremented by one), and then the third, where each `3`
is replaced by a `1`. The increment is done using the `$((EXPR))` construct,
which evaluates `EXPR` and substitutes its value. The replacement 
is done by the `${word//pat/replacement}` construct, which expands
`word`, then replaces each occurance of `pat` with `replacement`.

Then, in the new number, we replace any `11` with `12`, and strip off
any remaining leading `0`.

FULL_PROGRAM

### C

C doesn't have build in pattern matching, nor much of support for strings.
We therefore have to do a lot of manual work. We will be assuming any 
answer will not require more than 32 digits.

With the input number (`$N`) in the variable `num`, we get:

~~~~
# define BUF_SIZE 32
char number [BUF_SIZE + 1];
for (int i = 0; i < BUF_SIZE; i ++) {
    number [i] = '0';
}
number [BUF_SIZE] = `\0`;
~~~~

This initializes a NUL-terminated string `number` of 32 `0`s.

~~~~
while (num --) {
    for (i = BUF_SIZE - 1; i > 0 && number [i] == '3'; i --) {
        number [i] = '1';
    }
    number [i] ++;
~~~~

Set all trailing `3`s to `1`s, and increment the last digit which is
not a `3`.

~~~~
    for (i = 0; i < BUF_SIZE - 1; i ++) {
        if (number [i] == '1' && number [i + 1] == '1') {
            number [i + 1] = '2';
        }
    }
~~~~

This replaces any `11` with `12`.

Now we get to print the number, without any leading 0:

~~~~
    int i;
    for (i = 0; i < BUF_SIZE && number [i] == '0'; i ++);
    printf ("%s\n", number + i);
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM

### Lua

~~~~
function next_number (prev_num)
    local _, _, prefix, num, tail =
        ("0" .. prev_num) : find ("(.*)([012])(3*)$")

    return (prefix .. tostring (tonumber (num) + 1) 
                   .. tail : gsub ("3", "1")) : gsub ("11", "12")
                                              : gsub ("^0", "")
end
~~~~

We first split the given number (with a `0` prepended) into
three groups: the numbers before the last digit which is not
a `3` (`prefix`), the last digit which is not a `3` (`num`),
and any trailing `3`s (`tail`).

We then concatenate `prefix` with `num` incrementated by `1`
(`tostring (tonumber (num) + 1)`), and `tail` with all
`3`s replaced by `1` (`tail : gsub ("3", "1")`).

In the concatenated number, we replace each `11` with `12`
(`gsub ("11", "12")`), and remove any leading `0`
(`gsub ("^0", "")`).

FULL_PROGRAM

### Node.js

The Node.js solution is very similar to the Lua solution:

~~~~
function next_number (prev_number) {
    let [match, prefix, num, tail] =
        ("0" + prev_number) . match (/^(.*)([012])(3*)$/)

    return (prefix + (+ num + 1) + (tail . replace (/3/g,  "1"))) .
                                           replace (/11/g, "12")  .
                                           replace (/^0/,  "")
}
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM


### Python

In Python, a regular expression match returns a match object.
Which we can query for its capture groups.

~~~~
def next_num (prev_num):
    match = re . match ('^(.*)([012])(3*)$', "0" + prev_num)
    return (re . sub ('^0', '',  \
                 re . sub ('11', '12', match . group (1) +                 \
                                       str (int (match . group (2)) + 1) + \
                                       re . sub ('3', '1', match . group (3)))))
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM


### Ruby

Captures in Ruby are also available in match object -- but we can
index this as an array to get the capture groups. But it's still
the same algorithm:

~~~~
def next_num (prev_num)
    ("0" + prev_num) . match (/^(.*)([012])(3*)$/) do
        |match|
        return (match [1] + (1 + match [2] . to_i) . to_s +
                match [3] . gsub(/3/, "1")) . gsub(/11/, "12") . gsub(/^0/, "")
    end
end
~~~~

FULL_PROGRAM
